I back to forget about that. Oh my goodness.
When to leave? Stop.
One shot.
From above.
Calm down the PC. She did.
Shield.
So basically I just wanted to show
you and in brief part of the movie.
So this is a great movie.
Actually it has a I mean had a great
influence on my lifestyle and I highly
suggest you to watch this movie.
But why we chose this movie?
The theme of the movie was about a undergrad
undergrad student who graduated and simply.
Uh, just destroy any.
I mean degrio whatever and then.
Went into the wild.
Just in it I mean.
Solo trip, uh,
but here today we are going to do the same,
but for the program inside the memory.
So we already said that how
a program becomes a process.
So we are going to go deeper into the
steps of this transformation of the
program to the process and running
the process up until its termination.
So that's why I picked this movie up.
So hopefully this weekend we
can have a chance to watch this.
So I already uploaded the lab
and lectures for this week,
which is about how to bootstrap a program.
Very similar to the way the shell
with the straps up program.
So it's part of the process manager.
And the topics that we are
going to discuss this week,
I mean today and the next lecture.
It's from the Chapter 7 process environment.
That we are going to finish it today and
some part of the Chapter 8 process control.
We will complete this chapter
next lecture hopefully.
And a basically by these two
chapters we are done with the
process manager part of the kernel.
So the process manager,
part of the kernel,
also called process control,
and the names actually implies why?
Because this part of the kernel
controls how your program becomes
a process and controls the running
of your OP code of your program
up until its final out code.
So we already covered this part.
And then now we are in this part and
after that we go to the network manager.
And, uh, I think, uh,
we may touch on memory managers some how.
Uhm, another part of the kernel.
So now we are in the process manager.
Process manager is one of.
I mean if we want to prioritize
different part of the kernel,
process manager is the first one.
Because, uh.
The main purpose of a computer
system to run a program so to make
it a process and run our program
to solve a real world problem.
So process manager is the most
important part of the kernel.
And.
This is the trip that the program
actually go through up until its termination.
Very simple path.
There are different exceptions
to this simple path.
Uh,
which we will discuss next lecture,
but for today we assume
that we have a program.
It becomes a process and then
it takes the processor and it
runs and then up until its
final opcode and it terminates.
So we already discussed whatever
steps it takes us to create a program.
So we already said that a program you
write in a programming language such as C.
As a programming language.
And then you give it to the
compiler of that language,
which translated to the assembly.
And then you give it to the assembler of
the machine and you produce the opcodes.
In the lab, I believe in the lab, free,
uh, we fully covered this process.
After this, uh, we called the
whole process building a program.
So. At this point.
We already know that.
A processor should know from where
it should start your program and
the execution of your program. This.
Point of your program that helps the
processor to start the execution of
your program is called entry point.
Basically, the address of the
first opcode of your program.
Which is called also entry point.
So in C program, the entry point of
any program is identified by this
specific function main function.
And this is the simplest
form of the main function,
returns nothing and accepts nothing.
Void and it's the name of the function made.
And when you build a program using,
I mean having this simplest
form of the main function.
You can simply ask the shell
to bootstrap your program,
and this is the name of your program.
At the correct folder.
So if your program doesn't have this
function, your program cannot be run.
That's simple. Again, uh,
there are some exceptions that you
can have some program that we that
doesn't have main function will
discuss it next lecture or next week.
But for now, or any program in order
to be executed by the processor,
should have an entry point and
that into point is identified
by this specific function.
The main function in its fullest form or
complete form has this return type integer.
Again, it could be work,
but this is the complete form integer value
and it accepts two important arguments.
Agsi or argument counter.
This is the aggregation for counter
argument counter and then argument values.
So what are these two important arguments?
Basically, when you ask the shelter,
bootstrap your program.
You can ask the shell to pass some
values as an argument to your program.
Why, uh, we want to do that
because we want some flexibility
for execution of our program.
We may say that you want to run
our program given some values,
for instance AP.
Which is different for from running
a program when the arguments are,
for instance 1020.
So it gives us some flexibility
to make it run out of our program
based on some initial mean settings.
And the return value actually
shows whether the program runs
successfully terminated successfully
or there are some exceptions
or ever happened in between.
Here is an example, so I'll write a
simple program and main are I already.
I will upload this simple program as well,
so in this simple program I just
wanted to see how many parameters
or arguments are passed through our
our main program from the command
Shell Command prompt from the shell.
So here basically I say that how many
arguments is in the command line?
And then I go through the loop
from zero up until the number of
parameters or argument in the shell,
and then I just simply showed them where
I mean the values of these arguments.
So if you compile it and run it.
Without any parameter,
so you can see that even if you run
a program without any additional
arguments or parameters.
The name of the program is considered as
the first initial parameter to your program,
so all the programs in C language has
at least one argument in its shell,
which is the name of the program itself.
And this is the value.
So basically whatever you put.
In the command room and asked
to shift the bootstrap,
that program becomes the first
argument of the program itself.
However,
if you pass additional
arguments separated by space,
so you can simply.
I mean, uh, put some space or back tab space.
Or any any type of space actually
separates the arguments from the shell.
And then if you run it now,
your program receives 3 arguments.
The first argument is the name of the pure
program itself and the other arguments are
the values that you pass to the program.
One important thing here is that
these parameters are of type.
Carestar meaning that they are.
Aries. They are array of chars.
So basically these parameters
are passing to the program based
on the string of characters.
For instance, here we have P. AR. And one.
So these are each one is the character.
That's why the this argument
is a character point of list.
Basically, it means that.
We have our. He has a pointer.
To a place, and this place is a list.
Ends with a null value.
And each entry of this
list also is a pointer.
To a list of characters.
So for instance,
here the zero indices is a pointer
to the name of.
Character dot character.
Sorry. Uh, outside?
No forward slash.
Yeah. Uh, forward this character forward
slash character and character A and etc,
and then the second one is a pointer
to the list of characters par M1, etc.
So here is a better example.
In this example I write a program
that adds 2 integer numbers,
but the two integer numbers are passed by
the shell as an argument to the program.
So here I say that I have very
well hey I have a real poopy,
but the variable A&B are initially 0.
The actual value of AMP or received by
the first, I mean the second argument,
because the first argument is
the name of the program itself.
And then the third argument.
Because these are characters I
have to transfer it to an integer,
so there is a library routine as a
helper function called ASCII to integer.
It is in the standard library
as a library routine.
I use that in order to convert the.
A string or list of characters
into equal integer value,
and then I simply add them
and then we print the result.
So for instance,
if I call this program by two
additional argument, two and two.
To the first two goes to the variable a,
the second two goes to variable
P and then the result.
Before I can call this program
again for 24 and the result is 6.
This is a very simple example,
but it shows the very powerful.
Idea?
Basically, it says that your
program can act like a function,
so your program.
Can acts like a function?
So basically it can be a black
box that accepts inputs.
It process the input information
and then ask what the final result.
So it gives a lot of flexibility
to your program, so one time I
run it for two different numbers.
Another time I run the same
program for another two numbers.
So now that we know the program becomes
the opcode and we have the entry point.
To the first opcode of the program.
What's the next step?
The next step is we have.
The shell should transfer your opcodes
to the memory and make it ready
to be executed by the processor.
So it's kind of embarking
your program into the memory.
Or taking the cab or taking or
hitchhiking for the program.
So this is the process that we call it.
It's a, I mean a program becomes a process.
So how this transformation happens?
We call it a memory layout for a C program.
Basically your program becomes segmented
and its segments goes to accept,
I mean a specific part of the memory. And.
This separation and this segmentation is
called the memory layout of a program.
So from the very beginning of the semester,
from the week one,
we said that we write programs to solve
real problems and very few of the
problems can be solved by our programs.
But if you could solve the
real problem by program,
any program has two main parts,
algorithm and data algorithm.
Are those up codes that we have to
take these steps in order to reach to
the solution and the data part is the
information about the input data and
also the final solution to the problem.
And we said that when we want
to execute the program,
the data and the algorithm based
on the fun human architecture,
both of them should go to the memory.
And now we are going to discuss the
details of this transformation this.
Transferred.
So in the left side you see
programmed in C language,
but we know that again just a reminder,
we know that these are when it goes
to memory. These are all opcodes.
So these are all extreme of zero ones.
I just show it as it's C program
because it's easier to explain.
But in the actual, uh, I mean selling,
these are all zero ones.
So your program becomes a miss.
Segmented into these different components.
We have code segments.
Right after this code segment
we have the data segment
right after data segment.
We have a segment called.
Unblock started by the symbol or VSS.
Right after that we had he.
We just start from here up until up.
We have a component segment called this
tag that instead of just starting from
low to up it starts from up to down.
Actually it grows in the reverse side.
And then we have a component which include
the copy of the environment variable,
shell variables in kernel variables,
and then the arguments that is
passed by the shelter program.
I'm going to explain each segment in details,
but an important thing here is this.
We usually when we show the memory spaces
or locations, or we say that's OK,
the highest point is 000 and then
00010002 and etc.
So some I mean in normal setting we
show the memory locations from up
to down and the first address is 0
and then we increment the address
for other locations of the memory.
However, in the actual setting
in the system level programming,
the address of the memory is the reverse.
So we start from the bottom of
the memory at the low addresses.
From the address 0 and then we
increment the address up until
we reach the higher address.
So this is the correct.
A way of, uh,
I mean showing the memory address
inside the computer system.
So from the low address because
it's low part of the memory solo
address to high part of the
memory or high addresses.
And you have to memorize this a sketch or
this is the location of these segments.
The code segments is the lowest
part of the memory for your program.
Right after this code segment
we have the data segment,
the second part of the your program
dedicated to your program, and then VSS.
We have heat from the top.
We have a stack at the
highest part of your program.
Inside the memory we have the arguments.
Passed by the shelter program and a
copy of the environment variables.
This is important.
Although you may find UM other kernels
or other operating system that they
segment your program into other segments,
or they put these segments in
different locations of the memory.
But this is the standard way.
I mean, since the beginning
of the Unix operating system.
So this is the standard way of
storing your program inside the
memory and make it a process.
So the first part of your
program at the lowest part of
the memory is the code segment.
Oh, one thing I forgot to tell you is that.
For now, we assume that.
All the memory of the computer system
is allocated to this single program.
Besides the kernel and the shell,
we assume that there is no other
processes or other programs running at
the same time inside the computer system.
As a result, the whole memory space is
for our own program from the lowest
address up until the highest address.
All the more memory is for us.
At the lowest part of the memory they
shall puts the up code of your program.
As we said, these are just zero and ones, so
these are not characters of your C program,
but the OP code of your program. Also,
it's called this text part of your program.
Uh, inside the code section.
So it starts from the,
so these are the sequences from.
I mean no number two,
so these are the line numbers,
so 0123 up until for instance 100.
But if when it goes to the
memory it goes to the rivers so.
It becomes the first.
Part of the memory at the address 0000,
and then it goes to the
second part of the memory.
0001 and then the second
third of protocols in 3rd.
Part of the memory 0002 and etc.
So the last opcode goes to the
last part of the code segment.
For instance, 00 FF.
The next segment is the data segment.
The data segment is part of
the memory right after the code
segment that stores the variables.
But what type of variables?
All the global variables.
And local variables to the main function
only main function local variables to the
main function only or the global variables.
But with this condition they has to be.
They have to be initialized by
a defined value at compile time.
So for instance, in this program we
have two variable 3 variables results,
which is a global variable, a local variable,
but inside the main function P a local
variable inside the main function.
Because A and B are inside the main
function and they are initialized to
a default value 0, then the shell.
Creates a, I mean a space inside the
data segment for these two variables.
A goes for instance at the first
position of the memory because into MP,
assume that integer is 2 bytes,
so and the memory is an area of points.
So the Avery bill becomes two
bytes inside the data segment.
Right after that we have the
space for be variable,
so this is the variable and then these names.
In the opcode is replaced with
the address of the variables.
So basically,
although inside the code we
say A is equal to something,
but inside the outdoor a becomes
the address of that variable
inside the data segment.
But as you can see here, for the result,
which is a global variable, but it is not
initialized to any variable any value,
so there is no space or memory location
for the result variable inside outside.
So the next segment is the UM,
DSS segment or block started
by assemble segment.
So there is a history behind this name.
Why they chose this name?
For that you can read the
battle in the Wikipedia,
but the idea here is that all
the other variables that are not
initialized or uninitialized in
compile time goes to this area.
For instance,
the E result global variable
because it is not initialized.
It goes to this segment.
Because it's an integer,
so it takes two bytes,
assuming that each integer in our
system is 2 bytes and there is no,
I mean defined initial value for that,
so we don't know what's the value.
It could be any value or whatever
a resource in the memory from the
previous run off any other programs.
One thing is that it's this area is
very common for, for instance, the arrays.
Usually in our program we have,
for instance, Karen.
So you remember when we did
reading or writing from the file?
We usually had a buffer.
Of size,
for instance 20 which is not
initialized to any value.
So again,
I mean these uninitialized variable
inside the main goes to the this segment.
And then we have the heap and stack.
Those segments are kind of complex,
so I I just wanted to get rid of
the simplest segments and then go to
the stack and heap. So the shell.
Argument a part of the memory and then the
environment variable part of the program.
Are located at the highest part
of the memory for the program.
So for the shell argument, whatever the
shell actually passes to your program.
A goes to this area at the highest
confidence for our program.
We said that we can call this
program for two integer values.
Plus the name of the program.
So we have three arguments.
So because these are pointers to the
list of characters, so here's the way.
Actually, the data for the arguments
going to be stored in the memory.
So the first a argument,
which is the name of the program,
is the address to the list of characters.
So this goes to the list of characters here.
Dot forward slash main.
And then the last character of my program,
which is the,
so the name of the program is main underline.
At. So as a result,
at the correct folder so that.
Forward slash and etc.
Up until the last character.
This is the first argument to the program.
The second argument is the second parameter,
so the address to the second parameter.
Whatever you pass.
For instance, if you run this
program for the 1st parameter 2.
This location stores 2.
And the second part of the
third parameter is the.
Uh, for instance here,
fine.
So basically at this memory
layout we call the program
like this main underlying ad.
Space. At two space 5.
So when you run bootstrap your
program by this arguments.
This is the memory layout in the highest
part of the memory for your program.
Plus I copy a copy of the
environment variables.
We already said that.
We have a system called.
Environment variable, uh?
Which is it?
Char star pointer.
It has a table storing all the camera
variables and the shared value variables.
The shell, when it bootstraps or program,
make a copy of all those values
and put it inside the highest part
of the memory for your program.
Again, it's just a copy.
As a result,
if your program changes any value
inside the environment variable,
the impact just within your program,
it doesn't have any systemwide impact.
And then, uh, we have two main part
of the memory stack and the heap.
So before I start this tag, any question
I'm ready to take your questions.
So we have one question from Mesa.
Basically she said what is the
benefit of using the occean argv?
Why we previously used to keep it empty?
As I explained it gives you
flexibility to run your program
with different conditions.
For instance, here I run my program boy,
a two input variables AMB.
So if you change amp the result is different.
So you are treating or uh I mean.
Uh, using your program as a function?
For instance, one one,
another very good example would be this.
What if I tell you to write a
program that creates a file?
With a name that is given by the user.
So then you can write a program such
As for instance main underlying create.
And then are the user passed the
name of the file for instance?
Hossein Diet dot T XT then your
program creates a file that the name
of that file is given by the user.
Instead of just hardcoding the name
of the file inside your program,
you're excepting the name of the
program by the user as an argument.
This is one very good example.
Lexus Mesa.
Yes, Ernest asks when you say program
assumes that the whole memory is available
and shell arguments are saved on top of
memory controlled the memory management.
Basically, you don't have any
control on memory management.
This is the way that the.
Uh, when they shell asked Colonel
to bootstrap your program.
This is the way that your
programs become segmented.
And because I mean goes into the memory.
This information this memory layout helps
you to do some trick inside your program.
For instance,
you can find what is the address of the,
for instance the first part
of the shell arguments.
What is the address of some
variables inside this stack?
So this memory layout is helpful to
work with your program by addresses
of your opcodes or your variables.
Uh. I will touch on that.
I mean maybe next week,
but it's I mean this knowledge is
helpful and you'll find some use
cases for knowing why we have to know
this memory layout of the program.
Actually, right now you'll see one of them.
I mean, one of the use cases.
I mean,
knowing what's the benefit of this knowledge?
Makes sense harnish.
So basically to answer your question,
we don't have any control
on this segmentation,
but at least we know how
this segmentation happens.
And we can manipulate some of
the variables by address of the
variables inside the memory.
Yeah. So now let's go to this stack.
So. The idea here is this is the
brilliant a I mean a feature of C
program that after the C program
other programs followed that.
So the idea is that when you want
to do a task. Which is very big.
It's better to break it into
some smaller tasks or subtasks.
And then you isolate the beauties or
whatever is related to specific subtasks.
For instance,
if you want to do addition of two numbers.
You have to first accept AMD and then
you have to convert it to because these
are characters you have to convert
it from the CAD to integers and then
you have to do the actual edition and
then you have to do the printing and attach.
So you see that I mean,
these tasks are kind of separate
from each other,
so you can say that.
The task of converting integer
to a character to an integer can
be considered as a sub task,
for instance, uh,
and you write a function for that one.
And then the task of addition can be
done by another sub task and you can
write a function to do the addition,
just the addition of two and
then they printing.
The result would be another sub task.
We can create a function that prints
the result to the terminal or whatever.
You already know how to do that by
opening the terminal and writing
to the terminal.
So you can write another function to
do that for you. What's the benefit?
If you see error because you know
that that error comes from what
part we can simply identify the
root cause of that error,
and I mean fix that error.
But if you do not do this sub
tasking or modular programming,
and if all the lines of code
goes to one single file,
then you're gonna have one millions
of lines of code and finding
the error which part of the code
actually I mean makes the error
and it's it's very hard.
This is called modular programming.
And basically you subdivide the whole
task into some modules and each module
does this specific task and return the
dissolved and for instance the subtitle.
The result of this First off tax goes
to the input of the second sub task.
The result of the second sub task goes
to the third sub tasks and attach it.
It's called a pipeline of. Subtests?
So this is available C program.
So for instance you can see here
that I accept and be as a variable,
initially 0.
Then I wanted to initialize
these variables with the values
that is passed by the shell.
But these values are in characters.
I have to transfer it to integer
value converted to integer values.
So we can write another function,
ask you to integer.
Another file,
so here is the new file that I for
instance we write a.
Program that does this conversion.
It accepts the string of characters and then
it does something to convert it to integer.
And as you can see here,
even this function doesn't
do the actual conversion.
It calls another function to
do the actual conversion.
And then this function does the conversion.
When it's done, it returns the
converted value here.
And then, uh, we may have some lines
of code here and then when it's done,
come back to the original.
Point out the function that we did
the call to do the conversion of
the list of characters to integers.
So whatever error where is
it raised by the conversion,
it's not in my program,
it's in this program or in this program,
so you can simply pinpoint the problem.
So. In this way we call the function
or the code that calls another part
of the code or function caller.
And then the part of the code
that is called by another part
of the code is called colleague.
So you see here that the
main program is the color.
And the ATI is the colleague.
Also, the ATI is the color of.
This is strange, too long.
This string too long function and this time.
This is the call league of each one,
so a string 2L string too
long is the quality of oil.
And then the HY is the
colleague of the main program.
So.
What is important here?
Uh, in this sequence?
The important thing here is this.
When we do a call to their colleague.
We have to keep track of
their returning point,
otherwise we get lost in a colleague.
So you can see here that when we
do a call from our main program.
To the calie too I.
And when this function is done.
We have to get back to the
point that we did the call.
But where we?
I mean where we have the address of
the opcode that we did the call.
So that's the. Idea behind this
stack so when you start a trip?
And you want to go somewhere.
Uh, it's not like a human individual for our.
For the programs, the programs are
blind when they go to somewhere.
If they want to get back to the
point that they started the trip,
they have to have the address
of the return point with them.
So the program should have a knapsack.
And when they start a trip at
first before starting the trip,
they have to store the address of
the return so the home address.
And then they start the
trip and when they trip.
Is done, they look at their address that
they have with them and then they came.
Get back to the home.
Actually, in this movie.
Ah, if you watch the movie.
They I mean, the character couldn't
find the path to return to home and etc.
So if you watch this movie you can
understand this topic, I mean better.
So that's the idea of the having is
knapsack to store the return address.
So here is an example. So.
At some point at the first time,
the processor knows the entry point
or the first opcode of your program.
Inside the code segment.
It executes this execute this,
execute this and then it reaches here.
Before executing this,
which is jumping to another function,
this is the function that we have to jump.
The process should jump.
Before doing the jump,
it is stores the address of the return.
So what would be the return
address right after this opcode?
The address of the next statement?
So before doing the job it is stored the
address after return in its knapsack.
And then it does the job.
When it does the job,
it goes to this instruction.
The processor is, I mean execute
the whatever instruction is here,
but it is confident that at
any point whatever happens,
it has the address of the
return point, so it can.
The program can simply get back to
the point that that does the call.
So at this point it does some statement
and then reaches another jump.
Before doing another job to
another part of the code,
it's first stores the return point or the
opcode right after the upgrade of the car.
So it stores the return address, but this
return address is the second address.
And it put it on top of this knapsack because
in your backpack when you saw something,
you put something on top of each other.
So here is the same.
You have an upside,
you just keep the address of the return
so you store the first address and then
you want to store the second address so
it goes on top of the previous address.
And then now you are confident
that you can do the call.
You can do the jump without getting lost.
And then you go to the college.
You do this statement.
You do the conversion of the ASCII
characters to the integer values,
and you're done.
Now you want to return.
Return to where?
What part of the code?
You already know. Where is the
address of the return your NAP side.
It is on top of the yarn outside.
It's simply pop.
Or restore the topmost address
inside your knapsack and this is the
address of return and you do it.
Jump to that location.
When I say you do,
I'm saying the processor does this.
And then it reached the processor goes
here it does some more opcode here,
and when it's done here.
It should return to the
color of this function,
so will the address of the return.
It's already at the topmost of your knapsack,
so it pops. The topmost item.
And then returns to the point
that does the first call.
So you see here the.
Sequence of color to the colleague.
The more innermost you go.
The higher the address
return address gonna be.
So the return address of the innermost code
is in the topmost item of your knapsack.
And then.
The return address of your
first call is the bottommost
item of your knapsack.
And that's the purpose of
the stack part of the, uh,
memory layout for your program.
That's why because it's stack,
you already know what this
is tagged in data structure.
So basically it's an app side and it
acts like an app side for a traveler.
So a traveler,
when it wants to go when it the
traveler wants to go another city,
it fears store the address of the return at
I mean city and then it goes through a trap.
When the trip is done,
it look at the knapsack at the top
and sees the return address and it
pops the return address and come
back to the home at at Home City.
Very similar to a trip for a program.
But one very small or subtle
difference here is that the knapsack.
For a program is upside down.
So it's kind of weird because in
real world our knapsack or just.
I mean normal like this,
but for the program inside the memory,
the knapsack is upside down.
So basically the.
Upper part of the stack
is the bottom of this.
Black and then it grows.
In the reverse side,
by decrementing the
address of the stack.
So basically this stack starts at right.
Before the a copy of the
environment variables,
but it doesn't grow upward.
It grows downward.
By Decrementing the addresses.
So far it's minus 2 - 4 -
8 up until it reaches the.
This point at the end of DBZ segment.
One thing happens here is this.
Called Stack overflow.
What if you do a lot of inner trips?
For instance, your main.
Calls F1 function, F1 calls F2 function.
F2 calls a free function
and up until 1,000,000.
Something called.
At each call before the call,
you have to keep track of the return address.
So here you have to save one address.
So if this is your knapsack,
you have to keep the first address here.
And then here you have to keep track of
the return address and here you have to
keep track of the return address and etc.
At some point your knapsack becomes full.
So in the memory layout,
it's upside down at some point.
You put a lot of return address
again and again up until it reaches
the start of the BS segment.
It cannot overlap the BSS segment,
so it means that you cannot store
more return address, so that happens.
It's not overflow.
As a lecture assignment I put a
question for you to do more research
about what else can happen in order
to raise this tag or flow in order to
make this stack of the program full.
Another thing here is that not only
the return address of the function can
be kept in this stack, but also the
local variables and the arguments to
the functions are stored in this stack.
By these two type of variables I mean this.
So here. Except the main man is
exceptional, except the main.
When you do a call to any other functions,
for instance here,
the ETA I or hear the string too long.
Not only you have to keep
track of the return address,
but also all the arguments to the functions.
And the local variables to the functions
that you call or is stored in the stack.
For instance,
here this variable is going to be stored
at this tag when you called it on.
Also, when you call the string
too long before doing the call,
the variables to that function
call gonna be stored in the stack.
All the local variables of a function
and the arguments of a function
going to be stored in the stack.
Except I mean this is just for
me that is not in this stack.
All the other functions going
to be in this step.
Another way to do it to raise the Stack
Overflow is that if a function for
instance function F2 is towards a huge
local variables, for instance an array of.
Characters all.
For instance.
10 million points.
And if your stack doesn't have
enough time enough space to store
this area of 10 million bytes,
it raises the stack overflow.
So before going forward to the
next segment, which is heap,
so I'm ready to take your questions.
Yes, may Sam correctly.
First in first out.
That's that's the idea of the
aggressive behavior of the
knapsack or stack, yeah? Exact.
Any questions?
It's not good that you
don't have any question. So.
It seems I need you.
I meant to give me some feedback so I
can make sure that you are listening.
So we have one question from Mesa.
Depends on the memory exactly.
Yes, basically let me go
back to this memory layout.
Yeah, so if your memory is just
limited to one MB of memory,
so as a result not only your program
up code cannot be huge programs,
but also the data segment the stack.
These are just shrinks based
on just this amount of memory.
As a result,
you can just run a small program files
and your program files can do very, I mean.
A small number of function calls
and inner calls and etc. Is huge.
It depends on the memory size.
If you have,
for instance 4 gigabyte of memory,
then your program can be huge
Lord and vast amount of, uh,
I mean variables and etc.
Oh, this this sign of this stack?
Actually, I'll show you that we don't
know the size of this tag because that's
a good very good question by May Sam.
So that's a very good question.
I'll keep your this question
and I'll I'll I'll.
I'll be back with these questions that.
We do not know the size of this tag
and the size of heap in advance.
Because at runtime V is stack goes up and
down based on the number of function calls.
And also the heap that I'm going to explain.
However, the other parts the code
segment is the output of your program.
It never grows or shrinks, it is fixed.
In the other segment,
these are the variables that are
initialized in your main function,
so these are fixed.
We cannot add more variables
while your program is inside the
memory and it is running.
The same is with the BSS segment.
Also, the shell arguments and the
copy of the environment variables.
These segments are all fixed.
However.
These two part is that and hit
the size depends at runtime
and initially they are zero.
But when the program runs,
they grow and shrinks.
So the size of the stack and
heap depends on runtime.
I'll explain this a little bit more,
but that's a very good question.
So we have another question
from a maid Michelle.
Might be 10 address one
that actually can address.
Or is it a pointer that?
Oh, that's it?
That's a pointer to the address?
Oh sorry, that's the actual memory address.
So if a assuming that these are the opcodes,
so for instance,
this goes to the memory 0000,
the next is 0001,
the next is
00020003. Still no four and etc.
So when you do the call to this function.
The return address is the OP.
The address of the next opcode,
which is 0004 inside the memory.
So the my return address one is actually.
The value is 0004.
The actual address of the
opcode inside the memory.
Makes sense, Michelle.
Quit. OK. So before I start the next.
Part which is about heap. I need you
to send some feedback quickly guys.
We have 44 students. So yeah.
Rollbahn Vivian oil density Layla.
They are Danielle, so so far
I think we have this 10.
I won't continue if I don't receive.
I mean at least 30 or 40.
We have met on Randy markers niter.
John is still sleeping.
OK, thank you so much.
So the next part is about the heap.
HIPAA, as the name says, it's a.
Part of the memory.
That is just. A A vacant space.
4 hour program that can be employed
by us dynamically or at runtime.
So so far all our variables are in the
Dallas side segment or in the VSS segment,
or they are in upper memory
in the shallow argument,
or the environment variables.
The stag did anything inside this tag
is not controlled by our program.
The uh.
Colonel, when it does the jumping,
it pushes the address of the
return to this tag and etc.
So they pushing up the return address
and the popping of the return address
is all done by the processor.
We do not push anything.
I mean by programming.
We do not push anything inside
this stack or we do not pop
anything from this time.
There is only one part.
Of the memory layout that can
be reused by the programmer,
which is called heap.
If at some point at runtime
you want to allocate a memory
location for some purposes.
This is the space that the
kernel allows you to use.
Which is called heap.
In order to ask the kernel to give
you some additional space for you for
other variables or whatever which is
not already defined in your program.
There are some for now.
These are librarything.
These are not system calls.
But these library routines does
system calls to the kernel for you
in order to allocate some memory
location for anything that you need.
So again, these are.
This is the standard library.
It's the diaper routine behind the scene.
This liability does the kernel system called.
These two a library, I mean functions
is called memory allocation or mlo,
so you may hear about them
before and also reallocation.
So reallocation of the memory
and memory allocation.
So we will discuss only this one and we
leave this for you to read in from the book.
But the most important one
is the memory allocation.
At any point inside your program,
you can ask the kernel by using this library
routine to give you some memory locations.
To do what, I'll I'll show you an example.
I mean if you slide.
For instance,
you can say that give me 10 bytes of memory.
For what you can use it in
anything any way you want.
And this space.
Is allocated by the kernel to your program.
From this part, the heat pump.
If you look at this part carefully,
it is actually part of this tag,
but at the higher part of this
tag that is not used right now.
So again, it's not actually,
although inside the memory it is at the
high part of the memory, but it's a.
Actually it grows in the reverse order,
so it goes down,
so this is the highest part of the stack,
but inside the memory lower part.
So.
By assumption,
we can say that any program
can do some inner calls one or
two times at most 10 times,
but there is a huge space of
the stack that is not used,
so we can use reuse that part of
the stack for other purposes,
but from which part from the upper
part of this tag which is inside
the memory lower part of the memory?
So the heat starts from lower
part and grows toward the upper
part of the memory or lower.
Part of this time.
It's kind of reusing the part of
this tag that is not used yet.
So what's the, uh? Use case.
I just try to show you a very I mean a
beautiful use case of the memory allocation
and using the heap part of the memory.
So in a normal program.
The data segment part of your program,
which is allocated to your variables,
which is initialized and
DBSS part of your program.
At the time of the programming,
it is the size of the memory
that is assigned to.
These variables are fixed.
When you build your program,
you cannot add another variable.
For instance variable C.
You cannot increase the size of the result
from integer to long integer, it's done,
you are you built your program and it's done.
So during the compile time,
the size of the memory variable
and the variables and the memory
allocated to these variables are fixed.
The only thing that which is dynamic
is the value of these variables.
For instance, the value of A is initially 0,
but at runtime the value would
be 2-3 or whatever.
So the value of the variables of dynamic
but the size of the variable are fixed.
But by using the.
Memory allocation and the
heap are part of your memory.
You can have a dynamic size
for your variables at runtime.
So here is an example. What if?
I want to store two large numbers.
So if I just have two
variables A&B as an integer.
The maximum number that I can
store is if integer is to bite,
so each byte going to be 8 bit,
so 2 * 8 bits.
We have this 16 bits of storage.
At most we gonna store 2
to the power of 16 - 1.
So from the number zero up
until this maximum number.
So what is this maximum number?
So 2 to the power of 16. Minus one.
So this is the largest number
that I can store and give it to
my program 65 times or something.
So this program.
Only accepts numbers up until the
maximum number is 65,000 something.
However, what if I want to
store or do addition of,
for instance, a digit which has.
50K digits.
This is the number of.
Digits so we have a number
which has fifty 500,000 digits.
So then I cannot use just a simple integer
variable to store that huge number.
So instead of that I have to ask the.
Uh, the Colonel.
Based on the size of the input number,
I need the storage to store that number.
So basically I create two variables
just to store the size of the numbers,
not the numbers size of the numbers.
And then this is passed by the user.
Basically, the user says that I'm going
to give you a number which has 10 digits
and another number which has 250 digits.
So I transferred it to the integer
values as the size of the numbers.
And then I asked the Colonel to give me.
Integer variables how many
this amount of integers?
And this is the first address of the
location that is going to store.
The digits of the number which and we have
this amount of digits for that number.
And then here I asked the user to put the
digits of that large number one by 1.
This is for the first number,
for the second number, the same,
so I need to store integer digits.
How many digits in the amount of size B?
And then I asked the Colonel to give
me this amount of memory and B is the
address the first location of the
memory inside the heap, that is that
is going to store this huge number.
And then I asked the user to put
the digits of the second one.
And the right side you can see
the running of this program.
So I'm. Basically,
I run the program and I saying that I'm
going to give you a number with three
digits and another number with four digits.
So the program here asked me put 3 digits
and then I put digit one digit 3, digit 9.
And then it goes to the next 4 loop and
it asks for four digits 65 and attach.
And then simply prints out.
Uh, this plus this,
but this program doesn't doesn't
do the actual edition.
Because additional large numbers you have
to write the program to the definition,
so you cannot use this simple
addition in C program.
Because the result gonna
be larger than a two byte,
so you have to write your own code
to do additional large numbers.
But here I just wanted to showcase that.
What in what cases you need to
allocate memory dynamically?
So if the user.
Puts
I want, for instance the run
the program the same program,
the same program, but this time
the user says that I'm going to.
Give you a number with this amount of digits.
This is not the number.
This is the number of digits of that number,
so it's going to give you this
huge amount of digits for the
first number and this huge amount
of numbers for the second number.
So then your program dynamically
asked the kernel to give the program.
Integer spaces to store the first
number and to store the second number.
So my question from you is that what
happens if I run this program? This way.
Any idea?
So I would suggest you to run this
program inside your computer.
At home. I upload the code and
then you can write on your home
computer and see what happens.
Basically, the kernel tries to give you.
This is space from the
heap part of your program.
And the heap grows up until it
occupies your stack, and then your
program cannot do function calls.
So it's a tradeoff.
So the heap space is kind of a smart way
to reuse the empty part of the stack,
but if you exploit it,
I mean without attention to this tag,
then you occupy the stack and then you
cannot do in are calls to the functions.
You cannot store the return
address of the color.
And we said that this memory allocation
is part of the library routine,
and this liability. Does the system call.
But in this course we said that
we just wanted to do with.
You just want to talk to the kernel directly.
So is there any system call to
directly ask the kernel to give us
the memory location of the heap?
Says yes, but the name of these system calls.
I leave it to you as a lecture assignment.
You can search and see in what.
LA header file you have the system calls to.
Directly asked the Colonel to give
the memory location from the heat.
So. And now we are back
to these Masons question.
There is a command in the shell.
Basically gives you the size of its segments.
So before running your program,
you can ask the shell what is the
size of my program and this program
is the opcode of your program.
It's a program file of your program.
And this is the return data.
Basically it says that the text segment
which is the data segment the S.
This is the size in bytes.
The data segment.
DBSS segments. And.
I leave these two for you as a research
topic and this is the file name.
But the question is that this info
is at the compile time or runtime.
Any idea?
The shell, in order to give
you the size of this segment,
needs to run your program or it already
knows the size of these segments.
Correct at compile time because.
The code segment data segment VSS
and these parts are all already.
Except this part, sorry except this part.
Uh, also including this part,
but definitely for these three parts
it is already fixed and it is already
in the output of your program.
That's why it shows you the text size,
data size and size without
running your program.
So this is the correct answer.
But the question is that why the
this command the size command
doesn't give info about this stack.
Doesn't give you the info
about the heap size.
Any idea?
Why we don't have columns here
about this stack size or hip size?
Yes, correctly as I said,
because this stack size is going to
be determined by the function calls,
which is happening during the runtime.
Also, the heap size is it depends
on your calling to the kernel
asking for memory location,
so it depends on the runtime
execution of your opcode.
So this part.
Initially has zero size,
meaning that there is nothing
allocated to your program and all
these spaces are available for you.
But at runtime, this tax grow downward.
The heap grows upward and then at runtime
you know the stack size or the heap sides.
And the final thing here is this.
When the memory layout of your program
is ready and your opcode is ready
to put the strap inside the memory.
The kernel assigns an ID.
To your process which call
it process identifier or PID.
It isn't a negative number like
a file descriptor.
It is unique among processes meaning God.
Old if we assume that there are
multiple processes inside the memory.
The PID of this process to
your program is unique.
However.
It When you're process terminated,
the kernel can reuse the PID of
your program for another process,
so it can be reused as a result.
This is incorrectly called identifier.
So again, it's not an identifier.
It is incorrectly called identifier.
Because the kernel reuse the idea of
your process when the process is terminated,
in order to make it a little
bit close to identifier.
Something called delay reuse
is used by the kernel,
meaning that if your program
is assigned vidwans.
And your program is done.
Then it takes my son 10 minutes.
For the kernel and then the kernel
reuse the one for another process.
It's called delirious just to make sure
that the process ID's are kind of unique.
Even after determination, but again.
This is not an identifier for the
whole a lifetime of a program.
And there is a system called
to get the PID of your process.
You can add any program you can run.
You can. It is in the Unix
Standard Library header.
Uh, by using this system called you
can know the PID of your program.
And we don't have enough
time for the next part.
Uh, which basically the actual
running of your program and then
followed by the termination.
So we leave it for the next.
Lecture and.
Thank you so much for your time and
I'm ready to take your questions.
Yes, yeah, actually, uh, the.
Mesa asks a heap size for the heap size.
There is no address.
Basically, when you allocate
for instance in our program,
when you let me go back here.
That here. When you ask the kernel
to give you this amount of integers.
It looks at the heap.
If he's empty, it allocated.
Consecutive locations of the heap from
the start of the heap grows upward.
This amount of integers.
And then it returns the address
of the first location,
for instance 00 FF.
The next number here is this,
so from the last allocated memory
it is start to grow upward and then.
It allocates this amount of
memory to the second number,
and it returns the address of the first
memory location for the second number.
So for instance it returns 0FF.
F. So basically there is
no pointer for the heap.
The heap is allocated and deallocated.
Memory location is returned by the
first address of the allocated.
Pause. But food is stack in order to
keep track of the top of this time,
there is a pointer called the stack pointer.
This is that pointer is inside the processor.
And knows what is the location
of the topmost item in this time.
And the stack.
Actually,
this type pointer decremented in
order to show that what is the.
Top most part of the stem.
Next test.
Yeah, so basically he doesn't have any
pointer, but the stack half pointer
because they stack should know what
item is the topmost item of the stack.
Thank you, Danielle.
Thank you for coming and have a great day.
Uh, I'll be in the office,
uh, if you have any question,
I'm ready to take your question there
so we have one question from Sooraj.
I just called the Mac and used the
terminal for some of the lab 06 command.
They need admin access to
do step four of the lab.
Lab 06 let me. I believe, uh.
You don't need any.
Kind of admin privileges
even inside the new machine.
So let me go back.
Oh wait, a second. I just have to. Stop.